---
comments: true
date: 2013-04-17 20:47:02
layout: post
slug: shame-css
title: shame.css
categories:
- Web development
tag:
meta: Keeping track of your hacks
---

**Update:** I did [a short interview about shame.css](http://csswizardry.com/2013/04/shame-css-full-net-interview)
with .net magazine.

Something [Chris Coyier](https://twitter.com/chriscoyier),
[Dave Rupert](https://twitter.com/davatron5000) and I
[joked about recently](http://shoptalkshow.com/episodes/045-with-harry-roberts/)
was the idea of a stylesheet dedicated to housing your nasty, hacky, quick-fix
CSS. I’ve been thinking a lot more about it lately and I reckon it’s actually a
pretty  good idea; here’s why…

## The problem

We all know that, no matter how hard we may try, sometimes we _do_ need to use
quick fixes, hacks and questionable techniques in our code. It happens, whether
we like to admit it or not.

From using a quick `overflow: hidden;` instead of working out what’s actually
broken our layout, to the odd `!important` to override some poor CSS, there are
often times where we need to use less than ideal CSS in order to meet deadlines,
to get something working, or to fix pressing—or even live—bugs.

Whilst this isn’t ideal, we _have_ to do it from time to time; **all of us**.

The real problem, though, is that we rarely go back and tidy these things up.
They slip through the cracks, get ignored, go unnoticed, and stay for good. This
we do _not_ have to do.

The problem with leaving hacks and nasty code is obvious; it’s hacky and nasty.
However, other problems with leaving this code can arise… I think the most
important and severe is the fact that, as soon as another developer sees that
someone used `!important`, they feel less bad about doing the same; the next
developer who comes along and sees that someone bodged something doesn’t feel
too guilty about hacking something else. The first bits of bad code set a
precedent and make subsequent developers feel less bad about using poor code
themselves. <q>It was like that when I got here!</q> Give developers a clean
slate and they’ll really think twice about messing it all up.

What is needed is a way of allowing these hacks _when necessary_, but making
sure that they don’t go unnoticed and unresolved. Enter `shame.css`.

## The solution

The idea of `shame.css` is that you have a totally new stylesheet reserved
_just_ for your hacky code. The code you _have_ to write to get the release out
on time, but the code that makes you ashamed.

{% include promo-case-studies.html %}

By putting your bodges, hacks and quick-fixes in their own file you do a few
things:

1. You make them stick out like a sore thumb.
2. You keep your ‘main’ codebase clean.
3. You make developers aware that their hacks are made very visible.
4. You make them easier to isolate and fix.
5. `$ git blame shame.css`.

If anyone has to add a quick hack, they add it to `shame.css`, this means that
they’re putting their hacks out there in the open; it means that they are aware
that what they’re doing is hacky, it forces them to document what the problem
was, how the hack fixes it, and how they might fix it for real given more time.

It means that other developers can see what hacks are being introduced, and why;
it means that all the hacky bits of CSS are self contained, and it creates a
self-fulfilling todo list.

It also means that you can run a `$ git blame shame.css` to see what was added
when, and by who.

## Not a blame game

You’d be forgiven for thinking the point of this whole exercise is to shame the
developers (you can always pick a name other than `shame.css`) but it’s really
not. I am well aware of (and responsible for) hacks and quick fixes; your
product owner doesn’t care if you used an `!important`, they just want the new
feature out of the door. Hacks happen, **fact**.

`shame.css` is jokingly titled to make it a little light-hearted whilst also
indicating that anything in there is a bit of a shame; a shame to have to have
done, a shame to pollute the codebase with and so on…

By isolating all your hacks and bodge-jobs in their own file you can really
easily keep tabs on them; isolating them isn’t to shame the developers, not at
all, it’s merely to make the team aware of them and make them painfully,
unmissably obvious.

## The rules

Obviously you need some kind of rules and criteria:

1. If it’s a hack, it goes in `shame.css`.
2. Document all hacks _fully_:
   1. What part of the codebase does it relate to?
   2. Why was this needed?
   3. How does this fix it?
   4. How might you fix it properly, given more time?
3. Do not blame the developer; if they explained why they had to do it then
   their reasons are probably (hopefully) valid.
4. Try and clean `shame.css` up when you have some down time.
   1. Even better, get a tech-debt story in which you can dedicate actual sprint
      time to it.

### Example

<pre><code><span class="code-comment">/**
 * Nav specificity fix.
 *
 * Someone used an ID in the header code (`#header a {}`) which trumps the
 * nav selectors (`.site-nav a {}`). Use !important to override it until I
 * have time to refactor the header stuff.
 */</span>
.site-nav a {
    color: #BADA55 !important;
}</code></pre>

## Implementation

Obviously, the simplest way to implement `shame.css` is with a preprocessor that
would simply import that file. If you aren’t using a preprocessor then you’ll
need to have a build process which concatenates all your stylesheets for you.
The idea isn’t to make `shame.css` publicly viewable, so you definitely don’t
want two `<link />` elements for two stylesheets; `shame.css` simply needs
incorporating into your concatenated and minified stylesheet.

## Keep track of your hacks!

I really think I’m going to implement this; if not on my current project then
_definitely_ on my next one. I’d love to know if anyone else uses it, or what
you think to the idea.
