---
comments: true
date: 2014-05-02 21:34:30
layout: post
slug: my-trello-workflow
title: My Trello workflow
categories:
- Web Development
- Process
tag:
meta: "How I manage development projects using Trello"
---

I’m a huge fan and proponent of working agile and the various schools of
thought around it: scrum; Kanban; MVP; product-led, iterative development;
releasing little, early, and often; you name it.

[I recently shared](https://twitter.com/csswizardry/status/455670114328014849)
[a public demo](https://trello.com/b/KaRKUPfD) of the Trello board that I use
for development work—just one small aspect of running an agile project. This
post won’t teach you anything about running an agile project or team—you can
[hire me for that](/contact/)—but it might help you set up a decent Kanban board
if you already know how to work agile.

You will probably want to have this Trello board open as you read this article,
because things will make a lot more sense if you can have a look around for
yourselves: [trello.com/b/demo-project](https://trello.com/b/KaRKUPfD/demo-project)

<figure>
  <img src="/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/trello-demo-small.png" alt="A screenshot of my Trello board">
  <figcaption>
    <a href="/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/trello-demo-full.png">View full-size/quality (202KB).</a>
  </figcaption>
</figure>

---

## Trello

Personally, I really like a physical Kanban board—using magnets and different
coloured index cards—but given that I work with distributed teams, and I
work from various locations, a physical board just doesn’t work. We had physical
boards at [Sky](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BSkyB), and they were great—10′
long, and perfect for standing around and discussing during stand-ups.

Because I can’t have a physical board, I use
[Trello](https://trello.com/csswizardry/recommend), which is an _amazing_, free,
online Kanban board produced by [Fog Creek](http://www.fogcreek.com/). If you
don’t already have a Trello account, [you should definitely get
one](https://trello.com/csswizardry/recommend).

---

## The Columns

The most fundamental part of any Trello board is its columns. At Sky, we had
around 18 (yes, one-eight) columns on our board, but they worked—they all had a
place and a purpose. Sky’s board covered everything from design to DevOps,
engineering to acceptance testing, and everything in between.

My boards are typically a lot less extensive, with eight columns, but—as is the
agile way—I can scale them up or down depending on what comes my way. Whichever
way you look at it, it’s fairly safe to say that the standard <i>To Do</i>,
<i>Doing</i>, and <i>Done</i> columns aren’t up to the job.

### To Do, Doing, Done

The traditional—and Trello’s default—column structure is a simple <i>To Do</i>,
<i>Doing</i>, and <i>Done</i>. This sums up the general sentiment of a
development project, but it’s a vast oversimplification of the process. There
are different definitions and states of <i>done</i>, for a start, and various
people have different jobs <i>to do</i> at different stages of a sprint. My
current setup has the following columns, which I will explain in more detail:

* Product backlog
* Sprint backlog
* Elaboration
* Implementation
* Implementation done
* (User) acceptance testing
* Ready for release
* Released

### Product Backlog

The <i>Product backlog</i> is the product’s wishlist: This is the stuff that we
might want to build at some point. This can be seen as a dumping ground of ideas
and nice-to-haves, and the client is usually allowed to add and expand on things
in this column. It has nothing to do with the current sprint, but will be the
source of tasks for all future sprints.

Sufficiently mature products/projects might have their own <i>Roadmap</i> Trello
board elsewhere.

### Sprint Backlog

The <i>Sprint backlog</i> is the stuff that the team has committed to building
in this current sprint. It is sourced from the cards in the <i>Product
backlog</i> and should amount to one sprint’s worth of one scrum’s work. The
cards in this column should be decided on and prioritised by the entire scrum:
clients/Product Owners should steer product and feature decisions, and the
development team would decide on a suitable workload. Priority would usually be
proposed by the Product Owner, but ultimately decided by the whole scrum.

### Elaboration

A lot of the time, tasks might need investigating or discussing before you can
start working on them properly. For example, you might need to read up on
various different APIs before deciding which—if any—you might use for
development.

{% include promo-case-studies.html %}

A good real life example would be the card I dealt with just today. We’re
working on a very rapidly-developed project for the NHS, and phase one came
together _very_ quickly. I created a card called <i>Performance improvements</i>
in which I wanted to introduce
[ImageOptim-CLI](https://github.com/JamieMason/ImageOptim-CLI) and
[CSSO](http://bem.info/tools/optimizers/csso/) to our automated build process
(given the time-constraints of P1, we ran ImageOptim-CLI manually, and given
that the CSS only weighed 7.5KB when minified regularly, CSSO was of little use
to us anyway), but it was a task that had to be discussed: Was the time-cost of
integrating CSSO going to save us a substantial enough amount of bytes over the
wire? Could we run ImageOptim-CLI as a Git-hook? This was the elaboration phase
that this card went through before we decided to implement any work, if at all.

Anything in the elaboration column is typically an investigative or discussion
piece, and a lot of—if not most—cards will never need to pass through this
column.

### Implementation

<i>Implementation</i> is just another word for <i>Doing</i>: we’re basically
just implementing any work we’ve decided to do. This could be getting content
from a client, designing a user-profile page, building out our architecture,
setting up live environments, anything.

Implementation should cover the bare minimum to get that task considered
complete: testing and approval are separate tasks to actually implementing the
feature.

### Implementation Done

This is probably the one column that _everyone’s_ board could use right away. No
matter what process you have already, this column is _so_ useful.
<i>Implementation done</i> is basically a column for work that has been
completed by a designer or developer, but isn’t yet being reviewed, tested, or
put live. The work is done, but the whole task isn’t.  This column serves a few
purposes.

Firstly, it allows a developer to do their immediate tasks and then move on to
the next thing without having to worry about getting a Product Owner’s nod of
approval, or a test engineer to scrutinise it, or having to roll a release and
put it live. It keeps productivity up by limiting the scope of ‘done’. They can
queue up tasks for a future release, or a whole round of acceptance testing.

The next thing it does is it allows the rest of the team to see what tasks are
dev-done and are available to be reviewed or tested—something might have been
built and is functionally complete, but no one has started reviewing that work
yet. Anything in <i>Implementation done</i> says ‘Hey, my developer thinks I’m
complete, so someone please feel free to come along and test me.’ This column
becomes the <i>to do</i> list for the next people on the process.

### (User) Acceptance Testing

User acceptance testing (<i>UAT</i>) is when a client or Product Owner takes a
look at the task and either approves or disapproves it based on whatever
criteria you’re working toward. Anything that fails UAT would typically be moved
back into the <i>Sprint backlog</i> column until someone is available to amend
whatever was wrong with the work.

### Ready for Release

<i>Ready for release</i>, predictably, is any work that has been done, approved,
and is waiting to be put live. For me, this usually means merging it into
`master` or a `x.x.x` version branch.

### Released

<i>Released</i> is what most people call <i>Done</i>. It’s out there, it’s in
front of a user, it’s finished.

This might be putting something live on an actual client site, or it might be
me publicly releasing a new feature of [inuitcss](https://twitter.com/inuitcss).

---

## The Labels

When I used to use a physical board, we had different coloured index cards to
represent different types of task. Yellow index cards represented features or
additions, pink represented bugs, and blue represented (Dev)Ops work.

Trello’s cards are all the same colour, but they do have six different coloured
labels you can apply to them. You can also assign each colour its own meaning.
These are the meanings I’ve assigned to the six available colours:

* **Green:** Feature/improvement
* **Yellow:** Copy/content
* **Orange:** Product
* **Red:** Bug
* **Purple:** Design
* **Blue:** Dev

I find that these six labels—when used creatively—can cover pretty much all
eventualities. You might have to class any Ops work as <i>Dev</i>, or UX/IA as
<i>Design</i>, but it seems to work for me, and I can always change things
around if I need to.

You can also use multiple labels on any one card, to give multiple meanings. Red
and purple implies a design bug: perhaps the logo is fuzzy on retina devices.
Green and blue and purple means that we’re to design and build a new feature:
perhaps a carousel for the homepage.

### Feature/Improvement

Anything labelled <i>Feature/improvement</i> is something that isn’t in the
product now, but should be. It’s additional functionality or behaviour that
somehow improves or enhances the product. Most things tend to fall under this
category.

### Copy/Content

This label means that the card concerns itself with the creation or acquiring of
content, for example, writing up the FAQs, or getting employee biographies from
the client.

### Product

I find this is the most rarely used label, but it deals with any non-dev, ‘soft’
requirements. A decent example might be <i>Decide on pricing tiers</i>. This
isn’t a design, dev, or content issue, it’s a product related task that might be
part of the sprint, but is purely product focused. You may well have another
card entitled <i>Price comparison matrix</i> which deals with the design and
build of displaying these pricing tiers, but the tiers themselves are a product
task, not a technical one.

### Bug/Tech Debt/Blocked

Red was the clear choice for this type of card: anything that is labelled red
typically needs fairly immediate attention.

A bug is obvious: something broken in the code (or design) that needs fixing.
It’s not a new feature, but a fix for something that is currently live and
broken.

Technical debt is like a bug, but not quite. It’s something in a codebase that
isn’t broken <em>per se</em>, but is less-than-ideal. Perhaps, in a rush to get
a feature live, you hard-coded some values that should be dynamic. You know that
you need to go back and tidy these things up, but they’re not necessarily bugs.

I’ve written about [hacks—and how they’re
inevitable—before](/2013/04/shame-css/), and these are
exactly the kinds of thing we mean when we talk about tech debt.

<i>Blocked</i> cards are ones which are held up—or <i>blocked</i>—by other cards
on the board. Perhaps we have have a feature/improvement card entitled <i>Case
studies</i> which is a task to design and display some testimonials and case
studies on your client’s marketing site. You might also have a content/copy card
entitled <i>Get client logos</i> which is a task to get assets and content from
the client. You can’t design and/or build the case studies section until the
client has provided you with the content, so the <i>Case studies</i> card **is
blocked by** the <i>Get client logos</i> card.

### Design

The <i>Design</i> label, as I’m sure you can imagine, is any task that requires
design work. As I mentioned before, this does cast a very wide net, so this
might include IA, UX, UI, illustration, preparing assets, etc.

### Dev

Similarly, the <i>Dev</i> label is a pretty broad category. This could cover
Ops, front-end development, DB architecture, etc. Your mileage may vary, but
this seems to work just fine on the projects I’ve been working on.

---

## Members

Assigning members to cards shows you who is—or should be—working on a particular
task. It is not uncommon for a card to have a number of labels and members
attached to it: perhaps Jenna and Steve are a developer and designer working
together on the landing page.

Assigning people to cards lets them know what they need to be aware of, and also
lets the rest of the team know what everyone else is up to at a glance.

---

## Reading a Kanban Board

The beauty of a Kanban board—aside from their excellent way of organising
things—is that they are easily read at a glance. A Kanban board gives a great
visual overview of the state and health of a project without having to read or
research a single thing. Is there a mass of cards piling up in <i>Implementation
done</i>? Perhaps your Product Owner needs a hand UATing stuff, or you need more
test engineers. A load of red labels on the board? Perhaps you need to write
more tests to avoid bugs. One person’s avatar appearing more than anyone else’s?
Perhaps you need to try and lighten their workload.

A well-managed board allows you to spot bottlenecks in your process, and gauge
the state of a project very, _very_ quickly.

---

## Filtering

The beauty of Trello, which a physical board cannot provide, is that it can be
filtered. This means you can choose to view all design bugs assigned to Jane,
or all dev bugs across the entire project, or all outstanding content issues.
This really is a great feature for Project Managers/Product Owners/Scrum
Masters, but also for individuals to find out what their current workload is
like. For example, if I have a spare half-an-hour, I might filter to find all
tech debt tasks assigned to me in order to see if I can find anything that I
could quickly refactor.

---

## Extending This

This is just my setup, and only the parts of it that are general enough to
share. There are some more specific things I do, but they’re too detailed to be
of any use in this post.

As with anything, your mileage may vary: you might have a completely different
setup that works perfectly for you already, or you might find little value in
a <i>Product</i> label, for example, but the beauty of Trello—and agile as a
broader concept—is that you can shape it to fit your needs.

I hope this article has proved useful for some, and that you can take it and
extend it for your own work.

Agile and process is something I’m really, _really_ enjoying working on with my
clients at the moment, so if you feel like you could use some help then please
do [get in touch](/services/) with me—I’d love to work together on this kind of
stuff.
