---
layout: post
title: "What If?"
date: 2018-11-23 17:51:40
categories: Web Development
toc: false
meta: "How do we so often forget to ask the simple question: what if?"
---

I was recently conducting some exploratory work for a potential client when
I hit upon a pretty severe flaw in a design decision they’d made: They’d built
a responsive image lazyloader in JavaScript which, by design, worked by:

0. immediately applying `display: none;` to the `<body>`;
0. waiting until the very last of the page’s images had arrived;
0. once they’d arrived, removing the `display: none;` and gradually fading the
   page into visibility.

Not only does this strike me as an unusual design decision—setting out to build
a lazyloader and then having it intentionally block rendering—there had been no
defensive strategy to answer the question: what if something goes wrong with
image delivery?

‘Something wrong’ is exactly what happened. Due to an imperfect combination of:

0. images being completely unoptimised, plus;
0. a misconfiguration with their image transformation service leading to double
   downloads for all images;

…they’d managed to place 27.9MB of images onto the Critical Path. Almost 30MB of
previously non-render blocking assets had just been turned into blocking ones on
purpose with no escape hatch. Start render time was as high as 27.1s over
a cable connection[^1].

If you’re going to build an image loader that hides the whole page until all
images are ready, you must also ask yourself **what if the images don’t
arrive?**

This isn’t the first time I’ve encountered such an odd choice of development
strategy. A popular A/B testing tool does something remarkably similar: they
instruct developers to drop a `<script>` block into the HTML page that
immediately applies `opacity: 0 !important` to the `<body>` element. While the
page is hidden, an external and synchronous JavaScript file is requested from
the provider’s origin. This external file contains all of the information needed
to run the A/B test(s) on the page, and once the file applies the test(s), it
then removes the `opacity: 0;`. However, the fatal flaw here is that the file
responsible for showing the page again is separate to the file responsible
hiding the page in the first place.

This means that if the second file, for whatever reason, doesn’t make it onto
the user’s device _and_ execute successfully, we’ve left the user staring at
a completely blank page. There are a number of ways that file could go missing:
perhaps the third-party provider is suffering an outage; maybe the user has
a third-party content blocker that strips out A/B testing software; what if the
JavaScript is malformed and fails to execute? [These are all things that could,
do, and will eventually go
wrong](https://csswizardry.com/2017/07/performance-and-resilience-stress-testing-third-parties/),
so if you’re a developer who decides that you’re going to forcibly hide a page
until an event has taken place, you must also ask yourself **what if that event
never happens?**

While ever you build under the assumption that things will always work smoothly,
you’re leaving yourself completely ill-equipped to handle the scenario that they
don’t. Remember the
[fallacies](https://csswizardry.com/2017/11/the-fallacies-of-distributed-computing-applied-to-front-end-performance/);
think about [resilience](https://resilientwebdesign.com/).

This short post feels like a summary of several other things I’ve been trying to
teach for the past several years, so I would encourage you to also read:

* [<cite>The Fallacies of Distributed Computing (Applied to Front-End
  Performance)</cite>](https://csswizardry.com/2017/11/the-fallacies-of-distributed-computing-applied-to-front-end-performance/) (November 2017)
* [<cite>Airplanes and Ashtrays</cite>](https://csswizardry.com/2017/10/airplanes-and-ashtrays/) (October 2017)
* [<cite>Performance and Resilience: Stress-Testing Third
  Parties</cite>](https://csswizardry.com/2017/07/performance-and-resilience-stress-testing-third-parties/) (July 2017)

[^1]: 5Mb up, 1Mb down, 28ms RTT.
